So methods are things that break complex
programs into small manageable pieces.
So we've already been making
calls to some methods, right?
We call system.out.println when
we want to print something.
Println is a method.
We call scanners next methods
when we want to input something.
That's a method, right?
So methods are designed
to be used by other code.
Here's an example of a method declaration,
okay.
This very first line of
the method is a header.
It's called the method header.
So I'll walk you through like
each piece of this method.
So the very first part
is an access modifier.
This could be public,
it could be protected, could be private.
This indicates who has access to this
method outside of the class, all right.
So, within the same class,
anyone can access the method,
but then outside of the class you can then
specify what other code is
able to call this method.
Public means any method anywhere,
any class can utilize this method.
We'll talk about private and
protected in a bit.
The next word here is
a non access modifier so
valid ones are static you can use final,
you can use abstract,
you can use synchronized.
We'll get into what each of those mean.
For now, we've been using static, okay?
The access modifier, and the non-access
modifier, are both optional.
You don't need either one of these.
If you did not put public,
like you didn't put anything,
it would default to protected,
which is a package level access.
Meaning any other classes in the same
package can use this method but
not outside of that.
The next piece of this is the return type.
So, all methods are required
to specify a return type.
This means what is the data
type of the value that
you will return back
to whoever called you.
If you are not gonna return
anything because some methods,
they just want to do some execution but
not necessarily returning anything back.
If you still have to specify
a return type it would just be void.
The next part of the method
header is the name of the method.
So the name of the method by convention
starts with a lowercase letter.
If you use camel case and
it's typically in the form
of a verb because methods
do something righ?
So for me to call a method you
want a name that represents
what it is that method does so
I know to call that one, right?
This isn't always the case
that's also convention.
Sometimes that just doesn't make sense and
that's okay as well.
But in this case we have calculate sum.
The exception here is also for
methods that return a boolean value.
So usually those you're
asking some sort of question.
So those methods names
reflect a question like,
is number positive or something like that.
So boolean methods typically start with
like is or does or something like that.
The next part of the method
header is the parameter list.
Symbol which is enclosed inside
of a set of parentheses,
the parameter list is required for
methods.
Even if there are no parameters, you
would have an empty set of parentheses.
What this parameter list
indicates is that this is the data
that you have to send to me
the method if you call me.
If you call me, I need some data.
So for example,
calculate some is saying, well,
I need two numbers to calculate,
otherwise I can't help you, right?
And you specify the data
type of the parameter you
need as well as the name
that you are calling it.
This name, like number 1 and
number 2, is local and
specific to this method,
it means nothing to anyone other than
some sort of hint about what type
of data are you looking for here?
So when you call me and I say, give me
two numbers, number 1 and number 2,
you have a good indication.
Okay, I get what they want here,
all right.
So methods are uniquely identified
within a class by their signatures.
And the signature of a method
is the name of the method
coupled with the parameter list.
And by parameter lists,
the names of the variables are really
irrelevant is the data types in
the order in which they appear.
So if I were to say what was
the signature of this method,
it would be calculate some int, int, okay?
Now, inside of the curly braces of
the method is the method's body.
This is all of the code that would
be executed if you call this method.
So here we're going to,
add number 1 to number 2.
We're gonna store that
into a variable call sum.
And then the method if it did specify
a return type other than void,
the last line of the method
must return the value.
And it has to be of the type that you say
you were gonna return back because whoever
called you was expecting that right?
So like when we call scanner.next double,
we are expecting a double to
be returned back to us, right?
Questions on method definition.
>> Just one.
>> Yeah.
>> I assume like that's static keyword,
were earlier.
The very start, you mentioned
Java is like statically typed.
Does that have anything
to do with like that?
>> No, so
this static is more like you don't, and
I'll talk about it more after we talk
about objects, but you don't have
to instantiate an object instead of state
and everything in order to use them.
You can just use the method without that,
this way it means all right.
So I guess if I were to think about it,
I don't need to do like anything
dynamic in order to use this.
It's a static kind of flat,
use it whenever you want to kind of method